>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JULY 4: GREECE ON
THE EDGE AS VOTERS PREPARE TO
CHOOSE EITHER SPENDING CUTS AND
HIGHER TAXES OR POSSIBLE
EJECTION FROM THE EUROZONE; IN
VIENNA, NEGOTIATORS MAY BE
CLOSER THAN EVER TO MAKING A
DEAL WITH IRAN OVER ITS NUCLEAR
PROGRAM; AND IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, FROM MAIN STREET
DELANO, CALIFORNIA, A HISTORIC
DROUGHT HAS FARMERS DESPERATE
FOR WATER.
>> Reporter: MARY MORTGAGED HER
HOME, PLUNKED DOWN ALMOST
$200,000 TO DRILL A WELL.
IT SAVED HER FARM.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
WE BEGIN IN GREECE, WHERE THE
RESULTS OF A NATIONWIDE VOTE
TOMORROW COULD KEEP THE DEBT-
RIDDEN ECONOMY AFLOAT OR CUT OFF
DESPERATELY-NEEDED FINANCIAL
SUPPORT FROM ITS EUROPEAN
CREDITORS.
VOTERS FROM BOTH CAMPS HAVE BEEN
HOLDING MASSIVE RALLIES.
IF GREEKS VOTE "NO" TO ADOPTING
A SET OF SEVERE AUSTERITY
MEASURES, THE COUNTRY WOULD LOSE
ANY CHANCE OF GETTING FINANCIAL
HELP.
IF GREEKS VOTE "YES" TO THE
CUTS, THE COUNTRY COULD GET SOME
DEBT RELIEF.
THE REFERENDUM COMES AFTER
GREECE FAILED TO PAY A 1.6
BILLION EURO DEBT PAYMENT,
SHUTTERED ITS BANKS AND STARTED
RATIONING CASH.
TODAY, GREECE'S FINANCE MINISTER
ACCUSED CREDITORS OF TRYING TO"
TERRORIZE" CITIZENS BY
"INSTILLING FEAR IN PEOPLE" SO
THEY'LL APPROVE THE TOUGH
AUSTERITY MEASURES.
EARLIER, I SPOKE WITH NEWSHOUR
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MALCOLM
BRABANT ABOUT THE MOOD OF THE
PEOPLE ON THE EVE OF THIS
HISTORIC VOTE.
YOU'VE BEEN
REPORTING ON THIS FOR THE PAST
SEVERAL WEEKS FOR US AND OTHER
PLACES.
YOU'VE BEEN TALKING TO PEOPLE ON
THE STREET.
THE POLLS SAY THAT THIS VOTE IS
INCREDIBLY CLOSE.
WHAT IS THE FEELING THAT YOU GET
ON THE STREET?
>> IT'S IMPOSSIBLE TO TELL WHICH
WAY THIS VOTE IS GOING TO GO
BECAUSE IT'S A HUGELY DIFFICULT
AND COMPLEX VOTE FOR PEOPLE TO
MAKE.
THE QUESTION ON THE BALLOT PAPER
IS, SOMETHING THAT PROBABLY
BAFFLE ECONOMIC STUDENTS.
FOR ORDINARY PEOPLE IT'S A VERY
DIFFICULT CHOICE.
BASICALLY IT DISTILLS DOWN TO
WHETHER OR NOT YOU WANT TO VOTE
MORE OF THE SAME OR INCREASED OS
STATE WHICH MAY BE MORE SEVERE
THAT IS THE PAST FIVE YEARS.
OR SOMETHING THAT IS A STEP INTO
THE UNKNOWN BECAUSE NOBODY
REALLY KNOWS WHAT IS GOING TO
HAPPEN IF THE COUNTRY VOTES NO.
THE GOVERNMENT HERE IS BASICALLY
SAYING THAT THEY'RE GOING TO
HAVE A BETTER TERMS POSSIBLY
WITH THE CREDITORS.
BUT THAT IS SOMETHING THAT
REALLY S UNDECIDED.
SO THIS IS THE MOST DIFFICULT
QUESTION IN GREECE'S MODERN
HISTORY.
>> Sreenivasan: IT'S BEEN A
WEEK SINCE THE BANKS HAVE BEEN
CLOSED, MONEY HAS BEEN RATIONED.
ARE THE IMPACTS THAT YOU SEE...
ARE THERE SHORTAGES OF GOODS IN
STORES NOW DUE TO IMPORT
RESTRICTIONS?
>> NO.
WE'RE NOT SEEING SHORTAGES YET
BUT CERTAINLY SOMETHING THAT
PEOPLE ARE TALKING ABOUT IN THE
FUTURE.
THERE ARE CONCERNS, PEOPLE JUST
WON'T GET THE GOODS THAT THEY
WANT TO.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT EVERYBODY
NOW WANTS CASH.
BECAUSE CASH IS IN SHORT SUPPLY.
AND SO SUPPLIERS AREN'T GIVING
MATERIALS TO SHOPS WITHOUT
GETTING CASH.
CUSTOMERS RELUCTANT TO PART WITH
THEIR CASH.
THE LIQUIDITY IS SHRINK CAN THAT
MAKES THE DIFFICULT FOR THE
SOCIETY TO SURVIVE.
THE IRONIC THING WHAT THE
CREDITORS WANTED TO HAVE IS A
SORT OF A MODERN SOCIETY,
FINANCIAL SOCIETY WITH CREDIT
AND WITH MONEY SORT OF GOING
BACKWARDS AND FORWARDS
ELECTRONICALLY.
WE'RE GOING BACKWARDS IN THAT
RESPECT.
GOING BACK TO THE 1908s.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE THE
POSSIBILITIES ON MONDAY IN
EITHER WAY THAT THE VOTE TURNS
OUT, DO THE CENTRAL BANKERS WHEN
THEY MEET COULD THEY APPROVE
BAIL-OUT FUNDING IF THE YES SIDE
WINS OR COULD THEY SAY, YOU'RE
OUT OF THE EURO ZONE IF THE NO
SIDE WINS?
>> I DON'T THINK SO IT'S GOING
TO HAPPEN AS QUICKLY AS.
THAT THIS HAS BEEN A MUCH SLOWER
SLIDE THAN PEOPLE HAD IMAGINED.
PEOPLE WOULD HAVE THOUGHT THAT
AFTER THE DEFAULT THAT THERE
WOULD HAVE BEEN ARMAGEDDON THAT
HASN'T HAPPENED.
THE STRIKE DOWNWARDS HAS BEEN
FAIRLY GENTLE.
BUILT THE PROBLEM IS, THAT THE
MONEY IS RUNNING OUT OF THE
BANKS HERE AND THE BIG QUESTION
IS, IF THERE IS A NO VOTE WILT
THE BANKS ACTUALLY DRY OUT
BECAUSE THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL
BANK MAY FEEL COMPELLED NOT TO
GIVE THE BANKS HERE ANY MORE
MONEY AT ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT
THE SOCIAL TENSION REGARDLESS OF
WHICH WAY THE VOTE GOES?
>> IT IS REALLY SORT OF QUITE
INTENSE BECAUSE THE COUNTRY S
COMPLETELY DIVIDED.
PEOPLE ARE TALKING ABOUT THIS
BEING THE LEVELS OF HATRED THAT
MIGHT EXIST AFTER THIS SOMETHING
THAT DEEPLY THAT HAPPENED DURING
THE CIVIL WAR WHICH STARTED 70
YEARS AGO.
THAT IS A COUNTRY WHICH ALWAYS
HAD THIS TENDENCY TO TURN ON
ITSELF AND SELF DESTRUCTED PAST.
PEOPLE HERE HAVE ALWAYS FOUGHT
AGAINST EACH OTHER.
AND AFTER THE CIVIL WAR ENDED IN
1950, IT TOOK ABOUT 30 YEARS FOR
THE COUNTRY TO BE ALMOST UNIFIED
SO THOSE ARE THE KIND 6 TENSION,
IS THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT.
REALLY IMMENSE.
ALTHOUGH IF YOU WERE TO LOOK
AROUND THE CITY TONIGHT WOULD
YOU SAY THAT IT WAS RELAXED.
BUT THERE'S AN AWFUL LOT OF
TENSION UPPED THE SURFACE.
>> Sreenivasan: MALCOLM
BRABANT JOINING US FROM ATHENS,
GREECE.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: IN VIENNA,
NEGOTIATORS ARE RACING TO MEET A
JULY 7 DEADLINE FOR A DEAL ON
IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
LATE LAST NIGHT, IRAN'S FOREIGN
MINISTER ANNOUNCED THAT TEHRAN
WAS READY TO STRIKE A DEAL AND
THAT NEGOTIATORS HAD "NEVER BEEN
CLOSER TO A LASTING OUTCOME."
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY AGREES THEY'RE MAKING
PROGRESS BUT SAYS THERE'S STILL
A LOT OF WORK TO BE DONE.
DIPLOMATS FROM THE U.S., U.K.,
FRANCE, CHINA, RUSSIA AND
GERMANY WANT IRAN TO SCALE BACK
ITS NUCLEAR PROGRAM TO MAKE SURE
IT CANNOT BUILD A NUCLEAR
WEAPON.
BUT IRAN WANTS LEADERS TO LIFT
CRIPPLING ECONOMIC SANCTIONS
BEFORE IT MAKES ANY CHANGES TO
ITS NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
ALLOWING ACCESS TO U.N. WEAPONS
INSPECTORS HAS ALSO BECOME A
MAJOR STICKING POINT.
BLOOMBERG NEWS REPORTER INDIRA
LAKSHMANAN HAS BEEN COVERING THE
STORY, AND SHE JOINS ME NOW FROM
VIENNA.
THEY SAY "CLOSE" IS ONLY GOOD
IN HORSESHOES AND HAND GRENADES.
HOW CLOSE ARE WE TO REACHING A
DEAL HERE?
>> WELL, YES, THAT'S EXACTLY
RIGHT.
I MEAN YOU CAN BE CLOSE BUT NO
CIGAR AS THE OLD SAY CAN GOES.
THE AMERICAN DELEGATION HAS BEEN
CLEAR TELLING THAWS WHILE THEY
ARE CLOSER THAN THEY EVER HAVE
BEEN BEFORE THAT THIS STILL
COULD GO UP IN FLAMES IF SOME
VERY IMPORTANT POLITICAL
DECISIONS NOT TAKEN.
OF COURSE WHAT THEY MEAN BY THAT
IS THAT THE IRANIANS HAVE TO
MAKE SOME DECISIONS ABOUT GIVING
ACCESS AND SPECIFICALLY ACCESS
FOR THE IAEA WHICH MEANS THE
U.N. MONITORS TO INSPECT AND
MEET WITH PEOPLE AND SCIENTIST
LOOK AT SITES THERE ARE PAST
MURK WORK.
THAT IS GOING TO BE PROBABLY THE
DETAINING NEEDS TO BE WORKED OUT
FOR THIS DEAL TO COME TOGETHER
IN THE COMING DAYS.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE WAS
PROGRESS EARLIER THEY ANNOUNCED
BY THE END OF THE YEAR THEY
WOULD HAVE A REPORT ON THIS,
THAT IS SEEMED LIKE A STEP IN
THE RIGHT DIRECTION THAT IRAN
COULD UNDERSTAND THAT, THE U.N.
COULD LIKE IT, THE U.S. COULD,
TOO.
>> YEAH.
THAT ACTUALLY JUST HAPPENED
TODAY, HARI, I WAS HUGE NEWS
THAT IS IAEA DIRECTOR GENERAL
JUST CAME BACK FROM TAKE RAN, HE
CAME BEFORE REPORTERS TODAY SAID
THAT IF TAKE RAN COOPERATES THAT
THEY FEEL THAT THE U.N. COULD
PUT TOGETHER ITS REPORT, TO
DIRECT THE EXPERIENCE ABOUT THE
MILITARY DIRECTIONS IN THE PAST
BY THE END OF THE YEAR.
BUT THE KEY PART THAT HAVE
SENTENCE IS, IF TAKE RAN
COOPERATES.
SO, WHAT OUR SOURCES TELL US
THAT RIGHT NOW THE TWO SIDES ARE
WORKING ON A LIFT.
THEY'RE WORKING ON PUTTING
TOGETHER A LIST BASED ON U.S.
INTELLIGENCE AND OTHER WESTERN
INTELLIGENCE, ISRAELI
INTELLIGENCE, FIGURING OUT WHO
ARE THE IMPORTANT PEOPLE AND THE
IMPORTANT SITES TRYING TO MAKE
SURE THAT IRAN AGREES THAT THOSE
SITES CAN BE INVESTIGATED, THOSE
PEOPLE CAN BE INTERVIEWED.
WITH THESE SORT OF WHAT IS NOPE
AS ADDITIONAL PROTOCOL PLUS,
PLUS MORE ACCESS.
THAT IS REALLY WHAT THEY HAVE TO
GET TO THE BOTTOM.
WE HAVEN'T EVEN MENTIONED THAT
BUT SANCTIONS IS THE OTHER
CRITICAL PIECE, TO GIVE THIS
ACCESS THEY WANT CANGSS RELEASED
ON THE OTHER END THAT IS THE
OTHER STICKING POINT
PARTICULARLY IN TERMS OF TIME
SCHEDULE HOW THAT IS GOING TO
WORK THAT THEY STILL NEED TO
WORK OUT WE'RE GOING TO BE
WAITING FOR FOREIGN MINISTERS TO
COME TOGETHER TOMORROW IN THE
BUILDING RIGHT BEHIND ME, THE
PALACE WHERE THESE NEGOTIATIONS
ARE TAKING PLACE TO MAKE A FINAL
DECISION.
>> Sreenivasan: SPEAKING OF
TIMING, THIS IS WHAT MAKES
NEGOTIATIONS STICKY, BOTH SIDES
WANT THE OTHER SIDE TO DO THEIR
PART FIRST.
>> RIGHT.
WE DO UNDERSTAND THAT IN THE
LAST FEW DAYS THERE HAS BEEN
THIS CRITICAL AGREEMENT THAT
THERE IS GOING TO BE
SIMULTANEOUSNESS, WHILE THE
UNITED STATES AND EU PREPARING
THE LEGAL STEPS, THE REGULATORY
STEPS THAT THEY NEED TO TAKE TO
GIVE SANCTIONS RELIEF ON OIL
SANCTIONS, BANKING SANCTIONS,
UNFREEZING ASSETS AND THE REST
FOR ITS PATTY RAP WILL BE TAKING
ALL OF THE STEPS THE OF THAT IT
NEEDS TO PUSH MURK PROGRAM.
SO, THE WORKING IDEA THAT ON THE
DAY THAT THE UNITED NATIONS
VERIFIES YES, IRAN HAS TAKEN
THAT STEPS BY VERY SAME DAY THE
SANCTIONS WILL BE LIFTED.
IT'S GOING TO BE A COMPLICATED
THING.
I THINK SOMETHING WE COULD SEE
PERHAPS BY THE END OF THE YEAR
BUT AMERICANS HAVE TOLD ME THEY
THINK IT'S MORE LIKELY EARLY
NEXT YEAR, THIS REALLY DEPENDS
OUT QUICKLY IRAN IS WILLING TO
TAKE THOSE STEPS.
THAT IT NEEDS TO DO TO CURB
NUCLEAR ACTIVITY.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE THE
SOURCES THAT YOU'VE TONE THAT
ABOUT CHANCES OF THIS GETTING
THROUGH CONGRESS.
>> YEAH, I MEAN, IF IT WAS HARD
TO SEAL THIS DEAL HERE IN VIENNA
IT'S GOING TO BE REALLY HARD TO
SEAL THIS DEAL ON CAPITOL HILL
TO SELL IT TO ALL OF THE
CONGRESSMEN WHO ARE PREDISPOSED
AGAINST IT.
THE FACT IS, IT'S NOT PRESENTIVE
OF WHERE THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ARE
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE POLLING
MOST IS VERY MUCH IN FAVOR OF
THE NUCLEAR DEAL ON CAPITAL HILL
THERE IS LOT OF SUSPENSION ABOUT
THIS.
ALSO AMONGST THINK TANKS AND
PUBLIC INTELLECTUALS, PEOPLE ARE
CONCERNED THINK THAT IRAN CANNOT
BE TRUSTED IN ANY NUCLEAR DEAL
PART IS BECAUSE NET NET HAS
RAISED A LOT OF HIS EXPERIENCE.
WE'RE GOING TO, IF THIS DEAL
HAPPEN IS GOING TO HAVE 30 DAY
PERIOD WHICH CONGRESS CAN REVIEW
IT CAN EITHER SAY YEAH OR NAY
THOSE ARE GOING TO BE 30
INCREDIBLY TAN DEN SHIES DAYS TO
BE WALKING.
>> JOINING FROM OF FROES VIENNA,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS.
>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS JULY
4th, A MESSAGE FROM RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN.
HE'S BOTH CONGRATULATING THE
U.S. ON INDEPENDENCE DAY AND
CALLING FOR "EQUAL TREATMENT AND
MUTUAL RESPECT" FROM THE UNITED
STATES.
PUTIN'S STATEMENT DID NOT
MENTION U.S. AND ALLIED
SANCTIONS OVER RUSSIA'S
INVOLVEMENT IN THE CONFLICT IN
UKRAINE, BUT HE DID SAY:
IN EUROPE, A HEAT WAVE IS
SENDING TEMPERATURES SOARING.
IN ITALY, TEMPERATURES ARE
EXPECTED TO PEAK TODAY AT ABOUT
103 DEGREES.
AND SPAIN IS BRACING FOR A HIGH
OF 111 ON MONDAY.
TOUR DE FRANCE CYCLISTS ENDURED
EQUALLY STIFLING HEAT THIS
MORNING.
SOME SPECTATORS SET UP
INFLATABLE SWIMMING POOLS ALONG
THE ROUTE TO COOL OFF.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
THIS WEEK, THERE WAS ENCOURAGING
NEWS OUT OF CALIFORNIA, WHICH
HAS BEEN SUFFERING THROUGH A
HISTORIC DROUGHT FOR THE LAST
FOUR YEARS.
ACCORDING TO NUMBERS RELEASED BY
THE STATE AGENCY THAT TRACKS
WATER USAGE, RESIDENTS IN URBAN
AREAS CUT THEIR WATER
CONSUMPTION BY NEARLY 29% IN
MAY, WHICH IS A 15% IMPROVEMENT
OVER THE PREVIOUS MONTH.
THIS FOLLOWS THE FIRST EVER
MANDATORY WATER RATIONING IN THE
STATE'S HISTORY, PUT IN PLACE BY
GOVERNOR JERRY BROWN.
BUT WITH THE HOT SUMMER WEATHER
AHEAD, CALIFORNIA STILL HAS WORK
TO DO, AND THE DROUGHT HAS
ALREADY TAKEN ITS TOLL ON
AGRICULTURE, WHICH ACCOUNTS FOR
THE BULK OF CALIFORNIA'S WATER
USE.
AND AS YOU'LL SEE, ONE FARMING
COMMUNITY IS DOING ITS BEST TO
COPE.
IN THIS UPDATED STORY WHICH
FIRST AIRED LAST YEAR, JOHN
LARSON REPORTS FROM MAIN STREET
DELANO, CALIFORNIA.
>> IT'S GOING TO BE REALLY HARD
FOR THE BUSINESSES HERE ON MAIN
STREET TO SURVIVE IF IT DOESN'T
PICK UP.
>> Reporter: ALL ALONG MAIN
STREET IN DELANO, CALIFORNIA,
BUSINESSES CAN FEEL IT-- THE
DROUGHT.
AT 1111 MAIN STREET, SUSANA
GARCIA SAYS IT'S SIMPLE.
>> A LOT OF PEOPLE NOT WORKING.
A LOT OF PEOPLE ONLY WORKING,
LIKE, A FEW HOURS, BUT THEY'RE
NOT WORKING ENOUGH SO THEY'RE
NOT SPENDING MONEY.
>> WE NEED THAT WATER SO THERE
CAN BE A LOT MORE FARM WORK FOR
EVERYBODY, SO THEY CAN COME AND
SHOP AND DO WHAT THEY GOT TO DO
HERE.
>> Reporter: AT CHALIA'S BARBER
SHOP, AT 916 MAIN, THERE'S TALK
OF WILD BEARS WANDERING IN FROM
THE HILLS.
>> THE BEAR WAS EVENTUALLY TAKEN
OUT AND PUT IN THE BACK OF A
WILDLIFE TRUCK.
>> I GUESS THEY'RE LOOKING FOR,
WHAT, FOOD?
THERE'S NO WATER SOURCE, SO THE
BEARS ARE COMING INTO THE CITY.
>> Reporter: LEIAS SERVIN
WORRIES THE DROUGHT WILL COST
HIS PARENTS, WHO WORK IN THE
FIELDS AND CAN'T AFFORD TO LOSE
THE HOURS.
HOW ARE THEY GETTING BY?
>> WELL, THEY HAVE... I GUESS
THEY HAVE TO MAKE IT WORK.
BUT IT'S HARD GETTING BY WHEN
THEY ARE CUTTING YOU SHORT.
IT'S A COUPLE OF PAYCHECKS LESS
THAT YOU GET.
>> Reporter: DELANO'S MAIN
STREET SITS AT THE SOUTHERN END
OF CALIFORNIA'S CENTRAL VALLEY,
THE RICHEST AGRICULTURAL VALLEY
IN THE WORLD.
THE VALLEY SUPPLIES 25% OF ALL
THE FOOD EATEN IN THE UNITED
STATES, YET ALL AROUND DELANO
THE DROUGHT HAS COST THOUSANDS
OF JOBS, ESPECIALLY IN THE
FIELDS.
THIS GRAPE VINEYARD IS 23 MILES
FROM DELANO'S MAIN STREET.
CREW BOSS SONIA ROBLES, STILL
WEARING THE PROTECTIVE SUN MASK
THAT SHE WEARS IN THE FIELD,
SAYS SHE'S HAD TO TURN AWAY
PEOPLE LOOKING FOR WORK.
>> I WISH WE COULD HAVE WORK FOR
THEM, BUT, I MEAN, WE COULDN'T.
>> Reporter: WHEN THE
CONGREGATION AT UNITED FIRST
METHOD CHURCH, JUST A BLOCK OFF
MAIN STREET, SHARED THEIR
PRAYERS ON THIS SUNDAY, A 24-
YEAR-OLD COWBOY OFFERED THIS.
>> WE ASK, LORD, THAT WE RECEIVE
MORE RAIN THIS WINTER.
A LOT OF GOOD, JUICY STORMS,
LORD.
>> Reporter: MATT HUFF WORKS ON
A CATTLE RANCH 16 MILES FROM
DELANO'S MAIN STREET.
>> WELL, I KNOW WE NEED RAIN.
WE CAN'T MAKE IT RAIN OURSELVES,
BUT WE CAN DEFINITELY GIVE IT TO
GOD.
IT'S ALL YOU CAN DO RIGHT ABOUT
NOW.
>> Reporter: WHILE IT MAY BE
DIFFICULT TO APPRECIATE JUST HOW
MUCH THE DROUGHT IS CHANGING THE
VALLEY, LISTEN TO MATT AS HE
DRIVES OUT WITH THE EVENING
FEED.
>> I FIRST CAME HERE ABOUT FIVE
YEARS AGO, AND THE GRASS WAS AT
LEAST SHOULDER HEIGHT.
EVERY YEAR THAT WE'VE HAD A
DROUGHT, THE FIELDS REMAIN BALD,
JUST PURE DIRT.
WE USED TO HAVE DANDELIONS OUT
IN THE FIELD THAT WERE TALLER
THAN ME.
THAT, YOU CAN FEED A HERD OF
COWS WITH; THIS, YOU CAN'T.
>> Reporter: THE HERD USED TO
NUMBER 200, BUT WHEN THE DROUGHT
HIT, PASTURES BEGAN DYING.
THE RANCH OWNER BEGAN BUYING HAY
TO FEED THE HERD.
AS THE DROUGHT CONTINUED, THE
OWNER WAS FORCED TO BEGIN
SELLING OFF THE HERD YOU SEE UP
AHEAD.
COW BY COW, THE HERD DWINDLED TO
A 100 AND THEN TO LESS THAN 50.
HE ALSO SOLD HIS ONLY BULL, AND
WITH IT MUCH OF THE HERD'S
FUTURE.
BUT THE BIGGER STORY, THE REASON
WE'VE COME TO DELANO IS WHAT'S
HAPPENING ALL AROUND THE RANCH.
THE CALIFORNIA DROUGHT IS
ENTERING ITS FOURTH STRAIGHT
YEAR, A DROUGHT SOME FEAR COULD
BECOME THE MOST COSTLY IN THE
HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN WEST.
>> YOU GOT GOOD YEARS AND BAD
YEARS.
THIS IS WHAT I CALL WORST YEARS.
THIS IS REALLY BAD.
>> Reporter: MATT'S BOSS, RANCH
OWNER JESSE REVILLA, SAYS
DESPITE HIS BEST EFFORTS, THE
REMAINING HERD IS LOSING WEIGHT,
BUT FEEDING THEM IS BREAKING
HIM.
HOW LONG CAN YOU KEEP THAT UP?
>> WELL, THAT MEANS I GOT TO GO
SELL SOME MORE COWS.
I GOT TO SELL MORE CATTLE SO I
CAN BUY MORE HAY.
>> Reporter: SO THE HERD KEEPS
GETTING SMALLER AND SMALLER?
>> AND I'M GETTING POORER AND
POORER.
>> Reporter: CALIFORNIA
RESERVOIRS, ONCE PICTURES OF
ABUNDANCE, ARE MORE ALARMING
THAN REASSURING.
LAST YEAR, THE HOTTEST EVER
RECORDED IN CALIFORNIA, WATER
LEVELS FELL SO LOW THAT
AUTHORITIES CUT OFF WATER TO
MOST FARMERS, MEANING FARMERS
HAD TO USE WELL WATER OR LOSE
EVERYTHING.
IF YOU DIDN'T HAVE A WELL, WHAT
WOULD HAVE HAPPENED TO YOUR
TREES?
>> WELL, THEY WOULD BE HALF DEAD
BY NOW.
>> Reporter: TWO MILES FROM MAIN
STREET, MARY ANDREAS JOINED
HUNDREDS OF FARMERS NOW DRILLING
FOR WATER.
MARY GROWS 84 ACRES OF ALMONDS.
HER TREES REQUIRE YEAR ROUND
WATER TO STAY ALIVE.
SIX MONTHS BEFORE HER WATER
ALLOTMENT WAS CUT OFF, MARY
MORTGAGED HER HOME, PLUNKED DOWN
ALMOST $200,000 TO DRILL A WELL.
IT SAVED HER FARM.
HOW HARD WAS THAT DECISION?
>> IT WASN'T HARD BECAUSE WE HAD
ALREADY INVESTED SO MUCH.
WE CAN'T STOP NOW.
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN NEXT YEAR OR THE OTHER,
BUT WE HAVE TO KEEP GOING
FORWARD BECAUSE WE GOT
EVERYTHING, OUR WHOLE LIFE
INVESTED IN THIS 84 ACRES.
>> Reporter: WHICH IS WHY
FARMERS LIKE MARY WHO CAN AFFORD
IT ARE DRILLING MORE WELLS THAN
EVER.
DRILLING CREWS ARE ARRIVING FROM
ACROSS THE WEST, LIKE MATT
HAMMOND, WHO CAN'T KEEP UP WITH
THE DEMAND.
IF WE WANT DRILL A WELL IN OUR
FARM, HOW SOON COULD YOU DO IT?
>> WE'RE ANYWHERE FROM EIGHT
MONTHS TO A YEAR AND A HALF
BEHIND.
>> Reporter: BUT MORE WORRISOME
IS THAT SO MUCH WATER IS BEING
PUMPED FROM UNDERGROUND TO
REPLACE WATER LOST IN THIS
DROUGHT THAT FEW PEOPLE BELIEVE
IT CAN BE SUSTAINED.
WELLS ARE GOING DRY, AND
DRILLERS ARE FORCED TO GO DEEPER
TO FIND WATER.
THIS WELL, LOCATED 16 MILES FROM
MAIN STREET, IS HEADED DOWN
1,600 FEET, 350 FEET DEEPER THAN
THE EMPIRE STATE BUILDING IS
HIGH.
TO WHAT EXTENT DO YOU FEEL LIKE
WE CAN ONLY PUNCH SO MANY HOLES
AND PULL OUT SO MUCH WATER
BEFORE WE REALLY START SEEING
HUGE PROBLEMS?
>> WELL, I MEAN, WE'RE TO THAT
STAGE RIGHT NOW, I THINK,
BECAUSE THE DEEPER YOU GO ON
SOME OF THIS, YOU'RE LOSING OUT
ON WATER QUALITY, TOO.
YOU'RE GOING TO GET DOWN SO DEEP
AND THE WATER'S GOING TO START
GETTING SALTY ON YOU.
>> SO, THIS GROVE HAS NOT HAD
WATER ON IN A YEAR.
>> Reporter: RANDY WELDON IS A
LOCAL GROWER.
HE SHOWED US HOW FARMERS WHO
COULD NOT AFFORD TO DRILL WELLS
HELPLESSLY WATCHED THEIR
ORCHARDS DIE.
THESE ORANGE TREES ARE DEAD, AND
THERE ARE THOUSANDS JUST LIKE
THEM NOT FAR FROM DELANO'S MAIN
STREET.
>> IT'S HEARTBREAKING.
IN A LOT OF CASES, THE FARMERS
HAVE THEIR HEART AND SOUL IN
THIS LAND, AND IT'S LIKE LOSING
A PART OF YOUR FAMILY, YOU KNOW.
AND ECONOMICALLY, IT'S
DISASTROUS.
>> Reporter: IN CALIFORNIA,
WATER IS CONSIDERED A PROPERTY
RIGHT, SO FARMERS ARE FREE TO
DRILL AS MUCH AS THEY WANT; ALL
THEY NEED IS A PERMIT.
BUT NO ONE KNOWS HOW MUCH WATER
FARMERS ARE PULLING FROM THE
UNDERGROUND AQUIFER-- THAT'S THE
NATURAL RESERVOIR ACCUMULATED
OVER THOUSANDS OF YEARS FROM
RAIN AND SNOW-- AND NO ONE KNOWS
HOW MUCH WATER IS LEFT.
IF AN AQUIFER IS LIKE A SAVINGS
ACCOUNT, THIS IS A RUN ON THE
BANK.
>> IT'S BEEN OVER 50 YEARS SINCE
WE BUILT THE STATE WATER
PROJECT.
>> Reporter: AT THE URGING OF
THE GOVERNOR, JERRY BROWN,
CALIFORNIA VOTERS LAST YEAR
AGREED THEY HAD TO BE BETTER
PREPARED FOR A DROUGHT, SO THEY
PASSED A $7.5 BILLION BOND FOR
BUILDING WATER STORAGE
FACILITIES AND WATER RECYCLING
PROJECTS.
BUT THE EFFORT TO PRESERVE THE
WATER SUPPLY ALSO MEANS BIG CUTS
IN CONSUMPTION.
IN APRIL, GOVERNOR BROWN IMPOSED
NEW RESTRICTIONS FOR CALIFORNIA
CITIES, REDUCING RESIDENTIAL
WATER USAGE BY 25%.
AT FIRST, FARMERS, WHO ACCOUNT
FOR 80% OF WATER USE IN
CALIFORNIA, WERE SPARED THOSE
CUTS.
THEN, LAST MONTH, THE STATE CUT
WATER ALLOTMENTS IN NORTHERN
CALIFORNIA'S SACRAMENTO-SAN
JOAQUIN RIVER DELTA, DRIVING
FARMERS THERE TO JOIN THOSE IN
THE CENTRAL VALLEY IN THE RACE
TO DREDGE UP MORE WATER FROM THE
GROUND.
THIS ESCALATING THIRST FOR WATER
HAS ALSO LED TO SOME SURPRISING
PARTNERSHIPS.
FOR EXAMPLE, 21 MILLION GALLONS
OF WATER EVERY DAY FLOW INTO THE
CAWELO RESERVOIR, WATER HELPING
SAVE 90 DESPERATE FARMERS SOUTH
OF DELANO.
THE WATER COMES FROM, OF ALL
PLACES, HERE.
THIS IS CHEVRON'S KERN RIVER OIL
FIELD, JUST 35 MILES SOUTH OF
DELANO'S MAIN STREET.
IT'S THE THIRD LARGEST OIL
PRODUCING FIELD IN THE STATE,
MORE THAN 70,000 BARRELS PER
DAY.
BUT IN THE PROCESS OF RETRIEVING
THE OIL, CHEVRON PULLS UP EVEN
MORE WATER, A LOT MORE.
THE WATER IS USED FOR STEAM TO
HELP RECOVER THE OIL
UNDERGROUND, AND THEN SEPARATED
FROM THE OIL, CLEANED AND PUMPED
THROUGH PIPELINES TO THE
RESERVOIR AND THE WAITING
FARMERS.
>> FOR EVERY TEN BARRELS OF
FLUID THAT WE PRODUCED FROM KERN
RIVER FIELD, NINE OF THOSE ARE
WATER.
ONE BARREL OF OIL TO NINE
BARRELS OF WATER.
SO, WE'RE ALMOST LIKE A WATER
COMPANY THAT HAPPENS TO SKIM
OIL.
>> Reporter: BACK ON DELANO'S
MAIN STREET, THE DROUGHT CAN BE
FELT IN EVERY LOST SALE AND IN
EVERY CASH REGISTER.
NO ONE, OF COURSE, KNOWS WHEN
THE DROUGHT WILL END, ONLY THAT
UNTIL IT DOES, LIFE IN AND
AROUND DELANO FEELS HARDER,
FURTHER BEYOND THEIR CONTROL
THAN THEY'D LIKE, AND THAT
THE THINGS THEY HOLD DEAR HERE
IN THIS RICH VALLEY ARE SUDDENLY
IN PLAY.
>> IT'S GETTING HARDER AND
HARDER TO BE A RANCHER.
WE NEED THE RAIN.
EVERYONE DOES.
>> IF WE DON'T GET RAIN THIS
YEAR, WE'RE IN FOR SOME REALLY
BAD TIMES.
>> I GUESS WE'RE STILL HERE
BECAUSE THIS IS OUR LIFE AND
WE'RE HERE BECAUSE WE WANT TO
KEEP FARMING AS LONG AS WE
POSSIBLY CAN.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DATE WAS
AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE ACTUALLY
DECLARED?
FOR EIGHT THINGS YOU MIGHT NOT
KNOW ABOUT THE FOURTH OF JULY,
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND ON THIS
INDEPENDENCE DAY, A SHIP THAT
CHANGED THE COURSE OF THE
AMERICAN REVOLUTION SAILS AGAIN.
A REPLICA OF THE FRENCH SHIP
"THE HERMIONE," ALSO KNOWN AS
THE FREEDOM FRIGATE, CRUISED
INTO NEW YORK THIS WEEK.
IN THE HEAT OF THE REVOLUTIONARY
WAR, BEFORE DIPLOMATIC CABLES OR
EMAILS, FRANCE USED THIS SHIP TO
SEND A MESSAGE TO GEORGE
WASHINGTON THAT HELP WAS ON THE
WAY.
THE MESSENGER WAS MARQUIS DE
LAFAYETTE.
>> THE WORD THAT LAFAYETTE IS
BRINGING WITH HIM AS THAT
AMBASSADOR BASICALLY IS THAT AN
ARMY WILL BE ARRIVING, AN
EXPEDITION OF 5,000 SOLDIERS
AND, CRITICALLY, A NAVY, AS
WELL.
SO, SHIPS OF THE LINE.
AMERICA HAD A NAVY-- AND STATE
NAVIES, AT THAT-- BUT NONE OF
OUR SHIPS WERE SIZABLE ENOUGH TO
TAKE ON BRITAIN.
>> Sreenivasan: ADAM HODGES-
LECLAIR IS RE-ENACTING THE ROLE
OF MARQUIS DE LAFAYETTE, THE
FAMED FRENCHMAN WHO LOBBIED KING
LOUIS XVI TO SUPPORT AMERICA IN
THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR.
FRANCE PROVIDED MUCH NEEDED
NAVAL POWER TO HELP TURN THE
TIDE IN DEFEATING THE BRITISH.
IT WAS THE FRENCH NAVY THAT
HELPED ENSURE THE BRITISH
SURRENDER AT YORKTOWN.
>> WE DECLARED OUR INDEPENDENCE
IN 1776, BUT FOUR YEARS LATER
THE WAR WAS REALLY UNCERTAIN.
THE FRENCH HAD COME AND
SUPPORTED US, AND THEY WERE
GIVING ARMS AND EQUIPMENT, BUT
NAVAL SUPPORT WAS CRITICAL.
SO, A SHIP LIKE THIS ARRIVING
WITH A FLEET COMING AFTER IT
CARRYING LAFAYETTE-- AGAIN,
SYMBOLICALLY BRINGING THAT
MESSAGE OF SUPPORT-- WAS A REAL
GAME CHANGER.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS $21 MILLION
SHIP, WHICH SET SAIL FROM FRANCE
IN APRIL, WILL MAKE A DOZEN
STOPS ALONG THE EAST COAST.
AT EACH CITY, SIGHTSEERS CAN SEE
THE SHIP'S 32 CANNONS, HEMP
ROPES COATED IN TAR AND SHIP'S
BELL, AND INTERACT WITH A CREW
DRESSED IN PERIOD COSTUMES-- ALL
TO FIND OUT WHAT SEAFARING LIFE
IN THE 18th CENTURY WAS LIKE.
THE "HERMIONE" LEFT NEW YORK
THIS MORNING.
ON ITS WAY OUT, IT PASSED BY
ANOTHER FRENCH CONTRIBUTION TO
THE U.S., THE STATUE OF LIBERTY.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY
TONIGHT ISIS HAS REPORTEDLY
RELEASED A VIDEO SHOWING
TEENAGERS EXECUTING 25 SYRIAN
GOVERNMENT SOLDIERS IN FRONT OF
A CROWD AT AN ANCIENT
AMPHITHEATER IN PALMERA AFTER
THE CITY WAS CAPTURED IN MAY.
TUNISIA HAS DECLARED A STATE OF
EMERGENCY MORE THAN A WEEK AFTER
A GUNMAN KILLED 38 TOURISTS.
AUTHORITIES WERE CRITICIZED FOR
NOT RESPONDING MORE QUICKLY.
NOW THE GOVERNMENT HAS TIGHTENED
SECURITY, DEPLOYED 1400 ARMED
OFFICERS TO PATROL HOTELS AND
BEACHES, AND PROMISED TO CLOSE
SOME 80 MOSQUES SUSPECTED OF
SPREADING EXTREMISM.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.